Good afternoon. Welcome to the Johnson Space Center open house. We think we've
exceeded our expectations. We thought we'd have about 20,000 people show up
today just to the open house. We think that we're well over 70,000 now. So... We
thank you.
We certainly thank you for your support. I'm Sue Garman. I'm the Executive
Assistant to the Director of the Johnson Space Center. And on behalf of all the
employees here, we're happy to have you here. We're happy to have all of our
friends and neighbors in. And glad that you support the United States Space
Program. We hope that you have taken advantage and will for the rest of the time
that the Space Center is open today of the unique opportunity to look around and
see the kind of work that we do to help make sure that we have a human
spaceflight program. This last session deals with the historic Apollo 13
mission, and it features four of the flight controllers who successfully brought
the astronauts home. We're going to follow this with a question and answer
session. Let me introduce them in order from my right on across. first is Gene
Kranz. Gene holds a degree in Aeronautical Engineering. Prior to coming to NASA,
he worked as a flight loads test engineer at McDonnell Aircraft. He served as a
pilot in the Air Force, and he worked as a flight test engineer at Holloman Air
Force Base. He joined NASA in 1960 and worked as a flight director in both the
Mercury and Gemini programs. As the flight director for the Apollo and the
Skylab programs, he led the team in mission control during the first lunar
landing and the successful return of the Apollo 13 crew. During the Shuttle Era,
Gene served as the Deputy Director of Flight Operations and the Director of
Mission Operations. He retired from NASA in 1994. Gerry Griffin holds
a degree in Aeronautical Engineering. Prior to coming to NASA, he served as an
officer in the Air Force and he worked as an aerospace engineer with the Douglas
Aircraft Company. He joined NASA in 1964 and he worked as a flight controller
for all of the Gemini flights and as a flight director for all of the 11 Apollo
missions. His positions at NASA included Assistant Administrator for Legislative
Affairs, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Deputy Director
of the Dryden Flight Research Center, Associate Administrator for External
Relations, and Deputy Director of the Kennedy Space Center. He also served as a
Director of the Johnson Space Center from 1982 until his retirement from NASA.
Next is
Jerry Bostick. Jerry holds a degree in civil engineering. He joined NASA as an
aerospace engineer at the Langley Space Center in 1962 and he transferred to
Houston in the same year. He worked as a flight controller for the Mercury,
Gemini, Apollo, and Skylab missions. He was the flight dynamics officer for the
Apollo 13 mission. His other positions at NASA included executive assistant to
the NASA administrator, deputy manager of the space shuttle program, and
director of mission support. Since leaving NASA, he has worked as the vice
president of space systems for Grumman Corporation, and is currently the
director of business development for Northrop Grumman Technical Services.
And on my far right is John Aaron. John holds a degree in physics. He joined NASA
in 1964 as a vehicle systems engineer for the Gemini program. John was a flight
controller for the Gemini and Apollo missions. During the Skylab program, he was
the section head for electrical power, sequential, and instrumentation systems.
His other positions at NASA have included management positions working with
spacecraft software, management positions with the space station program, acting
assistant administrator for exploration, and assistant director of engineering
at the Johnson Space Center. He is currently the manager of the systems
engineering office. Let's welcome all of them.
Okay, this is going to be a very informal session up here. We haven't rehearsed
this script. The Apollo 13 I think really had several key points associated with
it. The first thing was I look at it as a real miracle of leadership. We were
fortunate, all of us up here, to grow up under some exemplary leaders. We had
George Miller. We had Jim McDivitt, George Lowe. We had Chris Kraft, Deke
Slayton, Dr. Gilruth. And each of these people gave true meaning to authority
with responsibility. So that when it came time to fly missions, these folks were
with us every step of the way. They gave us the job and they expected us to do
it. And I think that was one of the real keys to the success of that mission and
all the missions that we had in the program. The second element was associated
with the people. The people were universally young, they were convinced that the
impossible was truly possible, they had gone through very rigorous training they
had grown up in the business of mission operations. and we would spend the days,
weeks, months, and eventually the years together not only working in mission
control, but working in our offices, building the game plan, developing
confidence in ourselves, and confidence in each other. The training personnel we
had were the best in the world, because those were the ones that gave us the can
-do attitude, the never surrender, and with that kind of a background, we moved
into the Apollo program. There had been several very key missions in Apollo, and
everyone up here worked those missions. We went to the moon in Apollo 11. We had
difficulties getting down to the surface, but we made it. Apollo 12, we were
struck by lightning, and I believe Jerry was the flight director there, and
you've got another key guy on his right, John Aaron, who made the calls to get
the spacecraft back to life again. Apollo 13 came along, so we were no... The
kinds of problems that we had, we were convinced we could work and lick. So I
think we were ready at 55-55 when the problem occurred on board the spacecraft.
Everything had been normal up to that time. We'd gone through two team
rotations. We had four teams going. We had Milt Wendler, the maroon flight
director, who launched the mission. I believe Jerry actually did the
transposition and docking. I had the lunar orbit insertion. I was going to do
the lunar ascent. And Glynn Lunney was really the guy who was sort of making sure
that us rookies in the non-trajectory business did our work properly and by the
book. So, we had gone through the two team successions and everything was ops
normal up to that point. Jerry, why don't you say? Yeah, I'd like to pick up on
a couple of and amplify a couple of James remarks. I think at the time, well I
know at the time in my own case, in Apollo 13, I was 35. five, I probably had
more responsibility at age 34, 35, 36, than I've ever had before or since. And
as Gene said, this was really important in Apollo 13, because when we did get
into trouble, the senior management of the agency and the senior management of
the center really only had one question of us on the flight control team is what
can we do to help you? They really did leave the decision-making a bunch of
young people. I think Gene was probably 37. And he was probably the oldest
flight director on that flight. I think John Aaron was 27 or something like that.
Jerry was 28. No, you weren't.
Anyway, it was a young person's game. And then sometime when I reflect, and
obviously in this session we'll get into more of the problem and how we fixed it
and that sort of thing. But one of the things I thought about after the flight
was over, and this didn't occur to me during the mission, as soon as we landed
every one of these lunar missions, we didn't have much time to dwell on it. We
had to go on to the next one. Well, that was no exception in this case. The only
difference is we'd had this big problem. And the amazing thing to me is that
after we landed, this was in April 1970, we had a complete accident
investigation. We had a set of congressional hearings. We had to go fix the
problem, redo the command module pretty extensively in the oxygen system, and we
went back to the moon in less than a year. In fact, we were there and about ten
months later we flew Apollo 14. Now that shows you another difference in
attitude that existed 25 years ago, is when you had a problem and you had this
to have this adversity to overcome, rather than wailing and gnashing of teeth
and worrying about the future, you set the problem right and charged it on
because you had not changed your initial goals. And I think that was a very
fortunate time, with today's oversight and other kinds of problems that you get
into, it would be extremely difficult well, to do what we did in 1970-71, to get
the program back on track. So I think it's a very interesting historical
perspective. And it's one we probably ought to keep in mind for the future.
Finally, and I'm not going to say too much about it. Jerry Bostick ought to say
something about the Apollo. They've asked us to talk a little bit about the
Apollo 13 movie. It was a great experience. Jerry and I got to work on it as
technical advisors. and it was an interesting way that project got started, but
maybe Jerry will fill you in on that. And I really do think it's brought alive a
lot of interest in the American public. It's taken us back 25 years and it's
brought up some of these successes and overcoming of failures that I think is a
very positive thing and it's good for the space program. Jerry.
I had forgotten how much older you guys were.
The movie has brought a lot of attention back
to the mission, and it has caused all of us to reflect a lot on what happened 25
years ago. It was kind of strange to me at first that almost everyone asked the
same question, Weren't you guys scared to death when the accident happened?
Weren't you running around wringing your hands and pulling your hair out?
And of course, the answer was no. And then the next question is why? Well, the
only reason I can think why is because of the training that we had had, which
was, I don't think we fully understood it at the time. But it's good training
for any endeavor that you undertake, and that is to try to anticipate the
problems that are going to happen, have a plan of action for anything that you
can dream of that will possibly come up.
But, in reality, after the accident occurred, into the next four days while we
tried to figure out collectively how to get the crew home, we didn't have a lot
of time to worry about anything except the task at hand. And there was a time to
wring her hands and pull her hair. It was a great
example of teamwork over the past 10 years or so, anyway. In the aerospace
industry, there's been a lot of attention on total quality management and things
like that. that and it occurred to me not too long ago that even though we
didn't know it at the time, that's what we were all practicing here at the
Johnson Space Center 25 and 30 years ago. It was true teamwork. Everybody knew
the task that they had to do and we tried to do the best that we could. John?
Maybe I could present a little bit of what my role was in this mission and give
you my impressions of what was accomplished. I was a systems engineer, I manned
one of the controller consoles in the Mission Control Center as Gene said. My
job was, since there was two spaceships involved going to the moon, one to be
the mothership to transport the landing craft to the moon called the lunar
module, I was in charge of all the subsystems, all the vital systems and
utilities that kept both the mothership alive and sustain the crew, so I had a
very important responsibility. My role in the mission was initially to be on the
launch phase team, as Gene mentioned, and that would rotate me to be in the
landing phase. I wound up being on a part of the team that was charged with the
awful decision of trying to decide whether or not to shut the mother ship down
as a result of this explosion, how much longer should we spend our precious
power diagnosing this system versus a decision to shut it down and depends
really on the lifeboat. Having been a part of that decision process, we then,
while the lifeboat team tried to understand how to get the mother ship back in
the vicinity of the Earth safely, I was charged with the awful responsibility of
leading a team that says, given that the lifeboat team can get us back in the
vicinity of the Earth, is there any way to turn this thing back on, given this
limited power that we've got? The reason I bring you through that sequence is
not only acquaintance you with kind of what my responsibility was but I think
the thing that that I'm most left with that mission is as I sum it up to people
my conclusion is it works. Now what I mean by that is any complex endeavor like
going to the moon which that was a very complex endeavor. We on the ground here
as part of design team you know we did design, design, design, and we did train,
train, train and what if planning, try to cover every contingency, we train day
and night. I think what this mission serves as is a model that there is a method
by which you not only can train and design for all the cases you think will
happen to you, but that very method and model and training process will help you
react in a very successful way to things you never envisioned and never thought
you could handle. We wound up with a situation that we never trained for. The
spacecraft, the mission was certainly never designed for. But those fundamental
methods in this management team and this process served to be the thing that got
us home. I think that's a model for our future that says complex endeavors.
There is a method to handle the things you don't really train for, but the
things you don't. As usual, John is being extremely modest about his role in the
mission. He headed a team after the accident that had to try to figure out and
did how that we could get the spacecraft back with the consumables that we had
on board. We didn't have enough water. We didn't have enough electricity. We
didn't have enough oxygen.
And being a guy who worried about how to get the people home from an in-flight
trajectory standpoint, if I wanted to burn the engine or turn the platform on or
anything to use the guidance system, I have to go to John to try to convince him
that I needed 5 amp hours. I need to do one amp. That's not it. One amp! For ten
minutes.
Actually, at the time... We were at 55 hours into the mission. We were at our
second rotation of the flight control team, and it takes a while to get into the
groove. We always look towards that translunar phase as sort of a way to come up
to speed in all of our homework doing the final tag-ups with the various flight
controllers we got and just get ourselves ready for the events that would occur
once we went into lunar orbit. We had finished the TV show, secured the downlink
and one of the things the flight controllers always pride themselves in is
getting the crew to sleep on time and not having to wake them up during the
sleep period. We were in the process of doing this when we asked the crew to go
through a cryo-stir And we did this because the cryogenics tended to stratify in
the tank, and we always liked to get our best measurement gauging on the
cryotankage during the crew's sleep period because we knew pretty much what
their metabolic use was, so we could get a good handle on our consumables. So we
told the crew to stir the cryos, and Jack Swigert reached over, and he flipped
four switches. Down on the ground within just the next three seconds, three
controllers reported a problem. First one was the guidance officer who
identified that we had a hardware restart. ENCO came in and said, ENCO is the
communications officer, that we had switched from narrow to wide beam and
simultaneously with that we got a call from the E-com's position that we had a
main B-undervolt and about that time... Hey, excuse me, Jack Swigert first, and
then a level second came down and said, Houston, we've got a problem. And it was
funny how your mind works because the first thing I thought, which one's he
talking about? Is he talking about the hardware restart, the main P under fault,
or the communications problem. And that wiped clear in just a second. And then
you started listening up to the loops, and all the controllers started to come
on loops, because virtually everybody in the control center had some — were
seeing some symptoms of the problems that occurred. And it was really confusing
for those first two, three, to four minutes, because the reports kept coming in.
Nothing made sense. The crew was changing the configuration on board the
spacecraft, so about the time we'd get ready to make some recommendation to
them, that recommendation would change because they had changed something else.
Ah, the GNNC or the guidance and control guy was worried because he was seeing a
lot of pressure decay on the quads, the RCS jets that we use for attitude
control. And this is because we didn't know it was at that time an explosion.
But a shock had gone through the spacecraft that it closed a lot of the valves.
Actually, we were just bringing the propellant and the manifold to the jets and
the manifold pressures were decaying. the spacecraft was incapable of being
controlled. It was a very difficult three or four minutes. But then after about
three to three and a half minutes, the basic discipline and the training of the
team and the quality the controllers started to take over. In particular, the
control guy recognized that the jets had been, the valves had been closed and
that's why we couldn't control attitude. So we've now started to that solve our
attitude problem. The communications guy came up and said to say, until we get
our attitude problem nailed down let's use the Omni antenna. So now we were
getting information constantly into the spacecraft. The guidance officer by this
time very quickly had come up and said he had the time of the hardware restart
so now we could start tracing back in our data at the possible time this
occurred. So the control team, over the next 10 to 15 minutes continued to work
their problems with one exception and that was the the Ecom Cae Liebergat who
had the consistent problems associated with the fuel cells and the cryogenics
and it became obvious we were chasing the instrumentation problems early but by
the time we were about 10 to 15 minutes into this episode it became obvious that
we were seeing some real problems but but we were still dubious about what
information we could truly believe. But the crew, the controllers, the entire
team was coming to the conclusion that we had problems in fuel cells, problems
in cryos, and it looked like at least two fuel cells were done. And about this
time, about fifteen minutes into this entire episode, we were in the process of
a changing shift. Glynn Lunney had come in and turned to Glynn and told him to get
a hold of Chris, that he had better get in because we're in deep, serious
trouble.
And it was just frustrating to see the lifeblood and the fuel cells and
cryoscaping and not being able to do anything about it. And then Jim Lovell came
down and said, we're venting something. And as soon as he said venting, that
then synced, I think, everybody in the team. I think everybody sort of sent a
chill down your spine. that says, my God, we had some type of an explosion, and
in my mind, the first thought I had was survival, that we're now in a survival
situation, and these guys up here, somewhere along the line, in their careers,
flight controllers, have looked at this thing we call the doomsday scenario, and
you look it straight in the face, and it sort of gets your attention. Go ahead.
Interestingly enough, because Gene and I have talked about this, when the
accident first happened, And our thought was, now what do we got to do to go
ahead with this landing mission? Yeah. And I know you got to that survival mode
in a couple of steps, because that was the way we were trained. When it happens,
what do we have to do now to make sure we can still land OK? And Jim Lovell was
thinking the same way. He said, yeah, we've had some kind of problem, but we'll
get this fixed and go on and land on the moon. It's interesting how you kind of
step down and all of a sudden you say, there's no more options left. Now the
game is to get them back and forget the mission of going to the moon or- We
never trained this doomsday scenario because it's non-beneficial. I mean, you
end up killing the crew and the controllers end up going home. So you never
train to this. So all of the training that we have, there's always some way out.
And that's the way we're trained. And it went through my mind, in fact, in the
voice loops. Let's not do anything that's going to blow the mission. I was still
thinking, well, if we can't land on the Moon, we're going to go into orbit
around the Moon, kind of thing. So it's, the training process is, it's
interesting how your mind down modes under this kind of situation. We continued
to work on this thing for the best part of another hour. We recognized very
quickly, and we had two things going for us. In Apollo 9 mission, we had built
something we call the lifeboat procedures. procedures and about 45 minutes into
this crisis we went and proceeded to start digging out these lifeboat procedures
because once you do something like that you always save it. The other thing that
was useful on this mission was we had done a lot of maneuvers using the LM
spacecraft during Apollo 9 and all that data was in archive, so we really
started going two directions. One got to get the data out of archives from the
Apollo 9 mission and the rest of controllers to dig out their lifeboat
procedures. So I think that's all. I'll let these guys continue for a while.
Yeah. Interesting. And I just, I don't know what made me think of this, but
it'll show you a little bit how, by the time we got to Apollo 13, how we were
thinking about going to the moon. This was our third landing mission. We had
been there twice before on 10 and 8 and did not, Apollo 10 and Apollo 8, and did
not land. So this was not a brand new experience. And I recall I had, in fact,
Gene relieved me. I was the off-going flight director with my team. And I was
off playing a softball. I went down to South Houston here somewhere and was
playing a softball game with some of the other flight controllers. And we
finished the game, and I went back to one of the fellows' apartments to get a
cool one, and we got a call that there had been a problem, and that we'd better
get back out to the center. The first time I walked back into the control
center, I had on my sweatsuit still from baseball or playing softball. It then
became very apparent I lived in Nassau Bay at that point right across the street
here. I got home very fast to get some sleep because I knew I was going to have
to rotate back in the next morning.
Let me draw a slight parallel here with the movie that I'm sure many of you have
seen. Actually, my take, and I got there probably 30 to 45 minutes after the
accident happened, when I walked in things were as calm, it looked just like a
routine simulation that maybe a training simulation or something. There were a
few more people in the room because people had come back to see what was going
on and what was happening. But I'll never be I never will forget that first look
at the thing. It was it was a very calm room. People were going about their
business. Gene and Glynn Lunney were at the flight director console talking
things over. And if there was a stillness and a calmness, it was kind of eerie.
The movie probably overplayed a little bit. And they had to do that. In fact,
Ron Howard told Jerry and me both that there's going to be times in this movie
where I have to make it a little more emotional to make it entertaining. Because
it's not a documentary. It had to be an entertaining movie. So he took a little
poetic license or dramatic license in a couple of places. But let me say this
about the movie. The technical parts of it were correct. There's a few errors. I
know some of the NASA people could find little errors in the thing that they
weren't quite right. But the technical track in what we did and how we did it
was very accurate. The other thing that I remember about this first period is
the fact that not only the people here at the Johnson Space Center, but the
whole worldwide team responded just like that. We had recovery forces all over
the world. We had carriers, and we had destroyers, and we had helicopters, and
we had other countries that would help us. And it was very interesting to see
how that all really snapped into action right away. My team, when I got back on,
was heavily involved in trying to plan the right, as Jerry said, the right
trajectory to get us back. And we were moving, steaming carriers and destroyers
and moving airplanes all over the world. And it was just an amazing, amazing
logistics kind of effort. and it all worked and we ended up doing a maneuver
after we went around the moon to bring us back to a more favorable position in
the Pacific where we had some recovery forces. If we, we'd left them alone after
we got them back on a free return. They were going to land out in the Indian
Ocean with nobody out there. So we could have probably gotten them back but it
would have been a difficult time. Jerry why don't you cover the trajectory
options. Where we were when the accident happened and what the options were at
that time, why we waved off a couple options and, uh, what we did from then on.
Okay, uh, yeah. Jerry just reminded me when he was talking about it that one of
the things that the people have forgotten or never knew, I guess, is that at the
time the accident happened we were on what we call a non-free return trajectory,
which, which meant that, uh, it would go around the moon, if we did nothing
else, so it would go around the moon and come back toward the Earth but miss by
by several thousand miles. In orbit forever. In orbit forever. On the previous
flight's 11 and 12 to the Moon, we had been on a free return trajectory which
meant if we did nothing to go around the Moon and come back and hit the Earth.
Hopefully at the right angle. And anyway, as I said on 13th for the first time,
And the time we had departed
from that, not too long after translunary injection, we had done a small
maneuver to get the phasing and the lighting right for the place that we wanted
to land on 13, and that put us on this non pre return. So within a few minutes
after the accident, it was obvious that we had a serious problem them, and that
we weren't going to be landing on the Moon or even going in orbit around it, the
main thing we wanted to do from a trajectory standpoint was to get them back to
a free return. We still didn't know what the problem was, we didn't know how
severe it was, but everybody agreed that it would be a prudent thing to do to
get them on a path that would bring them back to earth. And we left them there
for about a day until we went around the moon. And then it is, as Jerry
mentioned, that free return maneuver that we did would bring him back to Earth,
but he had him landed in the Indian Ocean. Which is not a prime spot, because we
didn't have the recovery forces out there that you would like for an occurrence
like that. So the next day, we did another large maneuver that sped them up a
little bit. They got them home a little quicker, and moved their landing point
over to the Pacific Ocean, which is a place where we would like to have it, even
though we were worried about a hurricane coming up, or a typhoon, I guess they
call them that. Yeah, it was a tropical storm. Ellen kept bouncing around
through that area. That added a bit of spice to her life. But while us
trajectory guys were trying to figure out how to get them back what engines we
could burn because for the type of maneuvers that we needed
to do, you would normally use the main engine on the service module. And we,
rightfully so, concluded that it wasn't available anymore. We didn't know that
really until later on, but we didn't want to take the risks. But while we were
trying to figure out which engines to burn and how much to get them back and
what ocean to put them in, John and his guys were trying to figure out how to
squeeze everything they could out of the consumables. Because it would be
academic if we got them back to the right ocean at the right time. But they ran
out of oxygen four days before that. Well, yeah, in fact, my concern was, while
you were off computing all these very large and very delicate maneuvers that you
had to do, my concern was that what Gerry represented to me, it took a lot of
power and a lot of consumables to represent what he did. I'd like to pick up at
that point and make a comment that they mentioned earlier about being scared.
The rest of the team may not have been scared, but with respect to what the
oxygen tanks meant to the to the mission let me put that in context for you when
I heard that the oxygen tanks were the thing that had a problem when you go
through the worst case scenario those oxygen tanks were the lifeline of the
mission because oxygen is not only obviously what the crew breathes but these
are these spacecrafts very weight efficient design oxygen was a thing that you
not only breathed he took oxygen he made electricity out of it it's a byproduct
that making electricity that produced water water was a thing that the crew had
to drink, reconstitute food and then we used the final aspects of the water to
cool the equipment. So literally the oxygen tanks were the thing that was the
top of the supply line for all the critical things that sustain the spacecraft.
When we began to look at given that that primary power system was gone, a whole
new set of thinking, a whole new team spring into action. Right after we got the
command module turned down and in fact we turned it off, we all assembled in a
room and try to decide, well what could we do and that's when the resources of
the whole country came alive with respect to the team we put together. It's easy
to visualize that you get a lot of help coming in from all over the country. The
most difficult thing to do sometimes is to ask the right questions, set up the
right scenarios so that you can get productive use of that help that comes in
around the country. I think one of the things that the leadership of that
offline team that we set up in that offline room that was really the thing that
that put together that totally non-traditional sequence of how we could turn the
command module back on, leveraged not only the people that were trained in their
room, but we leveraged the whole country and the whole world with respect to how
does this hardware really work? Can we drain just a little bit more out of it?
Suppose you use it this way? I know you didn't design it that way. It's not
supposed to work that way, but could we do it. That invoked a team that we had
offline going that literally pulsed every manufacturer in this whole country.
Yeah, John was talking about the 210 operations. There were about six things
that had to be done down there. The first one was, and Jerry mentioned it, how
to figure out how to use this lunar propulsion systems to do all of the
maneuvers we needed to get back home. We were fortunate because we had a
starting point with the maneuvers that we used Napalo 9. John talked about the
power profile. The initial indications we had, we were about a day short in
power profile, I mean right when we started. And then Glynn and I came up with
the scheme to keep powered up until we went around the backside of the moon,
which made us almost two days short that John had to figure out. So, before we
could start getting better, we made things a heck of a lot worse there. There
are a couple other key folks. One of the things we had to do is to, and before
we could power down, was to figure out how to realign our navigation system.
Because we were, the spacecraft was cruising along in a floating cloud of frozen
oxygen molecules and debris from the explosion, and the crew couldn't use any of
their optics and see out through this cloud. So Phil Schaffer was one of the
guys who was tagged from the trench to come up with the techniques for platform
realignment, and we had to have that procedure nailed down in confidence in
before we could power down and let give John the time at which we'd power down.
So then in addition to that then we had to figure out how we're going to power
it up because in the power up there were a lot of systems in the command module
they were concerned might be frozen up, water batteries, those kinds of things.
And then they had to re-enter. Now the one thing that in all of my planning and
bookkeeping work we did, I completely overlooked was this LIO thing. And this is
where a great outfit called the Spacecraft Analysis Team came in and And this is
where, again, the core engineering of Johnson came in. They recognized that the
flight control team had their hands full with what they were trying to do. They
also recognized that, eventually, we'd fill up that entire spacecraft with CO2.
And again, as we say, this was a problem that had to be solved. They weren't
about solving the thing and proceed. I think they brought the solution into you,
didn't they, Jerry? They did. Which is real neat. So why don't you talk about
that? Well, that was a thing done by our engineering folks here that got turned
on, as Gene was talking about. Lithium hydroxide is what LIO means. It's a
canister something like your air conditioner filter. It filters the air that the
crew is breathing, and it takes out the carbon dioxide and captures it in this
lithium hydroxide trap. Well, we didn't have enough of those of the right shape
and size. And in the movie, if you'll remember, They made this device out of a,
threw a bunch of stuff on the table, didn't quite happen that way but that's
close, threw a bunch of stuff on the table and said look this is what these guys
have on board let's figure out how to run this put a square peg in a round hole
essentially. So using duct tape and flight plan covers they were able to use a
command module canister in the lunar module hole. Now what that did then is in
the, we used to a measurement called the partial pressure CO2, if it gets up to
about 15 parts per million, and John, that's where it's dangerous. People start
thinking fuzzy and it can kill them. And they pass out and then die of CO2
poisoning. It was up about 12 or 13 when they finally put this fix up against
the hole in the command module. Taped it all in, blocked up all the vents, And
immediately, the pressure, partial pressure CO2, started to drop. And it went
down below one. Actually, it worked as good as a lunar module canister. So that
was a, you talk about, and I know many of you guys and gals are involved in your
own shops and that kind of thing. That's the kind of plan it was. It was a
little bit like a scavenger hunt. See what you can find to make this thing work.
And it worked extremely well. One of the things that kept bothering us all the
way through the reentry phase to the return to Earth phase was this trajectory
shallowing, because by this time, we had had a pretty good handle. We didn't
have all the solutions. But we had a pretty good handle on the problems we had.
And we saw ourselves converging solution wise. The crew saw the Earth coming up.
But the one nagging thing that was always there was this trajectory shallowing.
So Jerry, why don't you talk about what you do. You've really testing his
memory. OK. Well, for all of us, I know that it seemed like we had one problem
after another. About that time we would get one solved or we thought had it
solved, we would be faced with another one. Obviously, to come back to
reentering the Earth and survive, you have to hit it at the right angle. And as
Gene said, we kept getting more shallow, more shallow, more shallow which meant
you would hit the atmosphere and skip out like a rock on a pond. And we really
couldn't figure out what was causing it. But we kept asking all of the systems
guys, what are you venting? What's going on here? And as a result of that, we
had to do a last minute and then of course, a corridor control burn, I guess we
call it, to make sure that we hit the right angle when we entered the earth's
atmosphere.
But it turned out that we were venting something. It was one of those things, it
was designed as a non-propulsive vent. but we learned that it's real hard to
design and manufacture a non-propulsive vent in space. And so it was just almost
a continuous small perturbation to the trajectory that was enough to, over
several hours, to change the course. Yeah. It was, these kind of nagging
problems really bother you because you don't have any answer for them. And when
they came up with their final maneuver, we had just finished reading up two
hours of checklists, you know, up to Swigert, and he had those copied, and then
one hour of checklist to Haise, and then Trench comes in and says, by the way, we
need another maneuver. And I mean, this was sort of frustrating because
everybody's sort of tired. But anyway, everything turned out the way it should
have been. Then we got up finally to the big time. John had got us enough power
now that we were very comfortable, with the power margins we had. And then in
fact we had sufficient power in the LM spacecraft to start charging the command
and service module batteries, which now we have moved positive power margins. So
John, why don't you take us from there through entry and then we'll go for
questions. Now, Gene mentioned that the key thing was power, because the, to
give you a feel for how much we were talking about, normally the mother ship was
never powered into space. we powered it up. So when we powered it up, it was
always on the ground. That usually took six or eight hours of very intense
sequences to do and we couldn't have the power to do that. We had enough for
about an hour and a half at a very reduced level because the oxygen was all
gone, the normal power was all gone. We were down to about the equivalent of
three car batteries that had been already discharged to some degree. The key was
how we could do that. We only had a certain amount of power. And as Jerry said,
we put together a process whereby they essentially made my team the power
brokers. Everything that anybody wanted to do with that spacecraft, they had to
come with us and convince us that we had to turn it on. And our usual answer was
no. You don't get it. You've got to do this a different way. Think about doing
it this way. In the end, what we did was invent a sequence, in not too elegant
terms. we just power the spaceship backwards. Normally the way you power up the
spaceship is you turn on all the support systems so that you do a very orderly
process, all the basic support systems, and then you start turning on
sophisticated systems like the guidance systems, and so forth. We decided to
power the spaceship up in the blind. We would go and turn the long lead guidance
systems on first, assuming that the crew would do it perfectly, and everything
would go exactly as planned, with no margin, and then we would turn on the
support systems last. So that meant we had no insight into that. But that did
give us one chance to do this and it depended on the crew doing it perfectly and
after four days of almost no water, no sleep, they did do it perfectly. That
was, turned out to be the key to the sequence of how we could do it. So anyway,
probably the greatest sight as we were going through this final power-up, I
think every flight controller for every team was sitting somewhere within the
control room the viewing room was full to overflowing all of our instructors and
thank god for our instructors they were off in the training room off to the
right and it really still i still get misty to these days because going through
this blackout and i don't think anybody has ever explained why the blackout we
were almost two minutes longer we were normally four minutes this here was
almost six minutes and I'll tell you what, your heart is as you'd call up, you
exit block out and boy yeah give a call and then silence and then you give
another call and then silence and you watch that clock in the wall count up and
up and then try it again and every concern you ever had relative to the mission
really starts to grab a hold in your second air and then all of a sudden it's
real neat. You got a call, Araya AOS, and then from the carrier, you had the
reports of the sonic booms. Okay, then you had radar contact, and then three
beautiful parachutes. Oh boy, were they beautiful. And from then on, boy, it was
celebrate. I mean, it was get the cigars out, and we always wait until the
cruise and the deck of the carrier, but boy, if there's ever a luscious smell
that these kids today aren't going to get. It's that whole room full of cigar
smoke with people cheering, patting each other in the back, flagging the
American flags, etc., and, boy, I hope someday that when our kids today take the
next generation to Mars, somebody's going to reopen that room for cigar smoking
again.
I guess it's time to take for questions, right? If any of you have questions,
just I think there's microphones. Come on up. Yeah, there's a mic over on the
other side also. While somebody's getting to the microphone, let me just add one
thing right quick. I alluded to it and I thought But the proud father sitting on
my right might say something about it. But the reason Apollo 13 the movie came
to be a real project was because of Jerry Bostick's son, Mike. Mike's a young 32
-year-old, has been in California for a few years, worked for Ron Howard for a
number of years, grew up right over here at Nassau Bay and went to Clear Lake
High School. His job was finding properties to make movies out of. and he heard
about this book that Jim Lovell and Jeff Cluger were going to write it hadn't
even been finished but Mike took the concept to Ron and Ron bought it and we now
have this very successful movie but it all started with Jerry Sun
I just have two questions first one is Is what happened to the service module
and the landing module when they were jettisoned? I was never clear where they
went. Did they reenter, or burned up somewhere? They burned up in the
atmosphere. Burned up the Earth's atmosphere. The movie sort of, I thought, shed
a not too good light on the contractor support there. As a new employee of one
of the contractors, I'm just
curious if that was true at the time and what it's like now. No, it was not
true. If there was one thing I didn't like about the movie, because I happened
to work for that company.
I might add, in a very nice way, but I would add that within the contractor,
since they designed and built and tested it to specifications that NASA offered
up, there was constant give and take between, can we do this, beyond what the
hardware is designed to do? And there always was this give and take. There was a
very constructive give and take between the contractor community and the NASA
engineers. But it was always very constructive. There was never an adversarial
relationship. It was an amazing team. And it was hard sometimes to find the
scene between the NASA engineers and the contractor engineers. We were one
homogenous team. Let me add, too, in the movie, because it's a good point that
you caught it. When we got to that piece of it, Jerry and I both said, Ron, you
need to be careful with that because that's not exactly the way it happens.
Well, before we started shooting the movie, Ron told us, he said, anytime you
see anything wrong, any of you guys, let us know. And he said, in about, I'd
guess, 95% of the time, 96% maybe, he accepted everything and would turn it
around. But he told us, he said, there are going to be times when I'm going to
say thank you for your input, and now I've got to make a movie. And that was one
case where he did. I just wanted to ask a question. You mentioned all the
redundancy in the training. When I also read the book, nobody ever obviously
conceived that the lunar module would have to support them, but the CO2
canisters, why didn't somebody think to make them interchangeable from the very
beginning? That's a good question.
What I would suggest you do, they are building a space station here. I would
suggest you maybe look at compatibility between maybe some of the U.S. and the
Russian systems so that that kind of a problem doesn't occur. Well I think if
you think about it the object was to get to the moon. The way to get the moon
was form a large team and organize about what I divide and conquer. And you give
major organizations a major job and you let them do it. And the business about,
well, one solution may be a square peg and the other solution may be a round
hole. We had cases about that, but that was what was involved. And it was never
envisioned that you would do that. Never envisioned you would do
that, but to go back and make all your specifications across the board,
intercompatibility takes time. It takes money. And we were about going to the
moon in 69, not about designing lio-canisters that were interchangeable. And
that was the mood of the design team. Yeah. And one other point, too. The lunar
module, as many of you know, is probably, bless its heart, boy, it always
performed well. But it was probably one of the ugliest children we ever, you
know, had. And it was designed for functionality. And I suspect that the reason
that that canister was round and it was a geometry issue because that cockpit
was just crammed full of stuff. The command module was tight, but it didn't
have, it had a little more flexibility. You could get that bigger square
canister in there. It also had a different shape. The volume was a different
shape. The volume was different. Enough said. I have two questions. One is, why
did the trajectory keep on getting shallower? And the other one is, what has its
explosion taken place on the way back from the moon? Could you have gotten back?
I didn't hear the second question. I'm sorry, I didn't hear the second question.
Why don't the explosions have taken place on the way back from the moon instead
of on the way to the moon? Could you have gotten back OK? Well, we found out
later the reason the trajectory was shallowing is that we were boiling off
helium in the lunar module. And as I mentioned, it was supposed to be going
through a non-propulsive vent. But there is no such thing. A little bit of
thrust. A little bit of thrust. A little bit of thrust. There it was, moving it.
If the explosion had happened on the way back from the moon and we didn't have
the lunar module. We wouldn't have. We wouldn't have made it. Or in lunar orbit.
If it had been. After the lunar module. If it had been the same type of
malfunction,
we wouldn't have made it. In fact, believe it or not, it has happened at about
the only time in the mission where we could have done anything about it. It was
late enough that we could squeeze the consumables out of the LM to get back,
and it was earlier enough that we still had the LM and all of its
capabilities. Very fortuitous. So very fortuitous.
Two questions over here. One quick one is that, maybe this was dramatic license
on Ron Howard's part, but that controlled burn to improve the the angle seemed
to be like, uh... about as stable as a bottle rocket. Was it really that
unstable? And then, I guess, the second... Yes, sir? What they did there is...
and it was a... much of a... what happened in the movie, when they first filmed,
I guess if he had put most everything he wanted to in there, it would've been a
four hour movie, and he was saying maybe we were gonna have another war and
peace here. So he had to chop it down. And what he was trying to depict, it was
a very level on the first burn that they did in a docked fashion. He and Fred
Hayes had to learn a whole new way of controlling the vehicle because the center
of gravity of this pair had changed and when you fired trying to translate it
would rotate the whole stack and when you tried to rotate it would translate. So
they had to figure out new controls, a little bit like rubbing the head and
patting the stomach or vice versa. So what you saw in the movie was- Indigative
in the first burn. It was more like the first one. It was more of a composite of
all three major burns that we did, but more like the first one. And so they got
that learning curve. The crew got that learning curve down later, where they
were actually pretty comfortable in doing this. And I think Fred Hayes control
role, and Swigert timed the engine burn and level handle pitch. And so they
finally got this thing down to where they could could control it. But what Ron
was trying to show is that there was this problem it was different and so it
kind of got compressed. But I like your bottle rocket term that's a pretty
accurate description. The first burn they did had a lot of that. I guess the
second question is that after all this after their guidance is all hosed up how
close to the ship did they actually land? Close. You know I don't remember but
you could see it from the ship. Yeah it was That's one of the closest ones that
we have. Yeah. In fact. And remember, we moved the carrier a mile off the entry
because we almost hit one. Yeah. We almost hit a carrier. One of the things,
actually, in the final burn, they overburned. They actually targeted overburn
there, which brought us in a bit short, which brought us closer to the carrier
than we had been previously. It was within eyesight of the carrier. It was two
miles. Two to five miles. Yeah. Thank you. We overburned to make sure that we
knew that it wasn't
But it wasn't as steep as the movie.
Well, first I'd like to congratulate you on your performance in The Mission, and
I would like to say that you are true American heroes. Thank you.
Thank you.
Well, my question is, before the crew jettisoned the service module, you had no
idea the extent of the explosion. And, of course, after it was jettisoned, the
crew took a picture of it as it was floating away towards the atmosphere. What
was going through your mind whenever you saw those pictures for the first time
seeing how massive the explosion was? I think this is a good question for
everybody. From my mind, because we had had a very intense debate in the control
center, it was relatively short whether to use the service propulsion engine,
and several of us lined up. I lined up and said, hey, we don't want to use it
because we don't know what happened back there. First thing that went through my
mind was, thank God we didn't use it. Yeah. OK. The first thing, that of course, we
didn't see that picture immediately because we had to get the camera, but we
didn't have TV on it. Well, we had the purple description. The crew took the
picture, but they described it. And when Jim said the whole panel on the side of
that thing is blown out, the word picture, I had the same reaction that Gene did
is I had two thoughts. One was thank God we didn't use the service engine,
service propulsion system. But the second thing was, I wonder what's going to
happen to that heat shield. The heat shield was the next question. The heat
shield was the next question. Just from his word description, it was
frightening. My main thought was, I'm glad we didn't see it earlier, because if
we need to have that, it was brilliant. We sure worried a lot more.
How long did the actual explosion last? 16 seconds. OK. From the time they flip
the switches until the panel is gone. This is kind of a two-part question. I'd
like to find out what each of you, briefly, what each of you is doing now. And
then second, is there any way that you feel that your knowledge and expertise in
that of others like you could be more fully utilized now and in the future?
Start! I'll tell you what. We'll go this way here, saying what are we doing now,
and then they'll start that way. What can we do in the future? What I'm doing
right now is I literally did retire. I'm building an aerobatic biplane. It's
essentially complete. I got a final painting to do. I hope to be flying it this
December. I also have been doing air shows throughout the last two summers in a
flight engineering position, of B-17 with Lone Star? I took early retirement
from NASA in 1986 and went on the last 10 years. I've been involved in the
private sector in a number of different businesses and am currently living up in
the Hill Country, up near Kerrville, in the little town of Hunt, if any of you
know where that is, where all the camps are. But I'm still a consultant, I chair
the board of a public company that is based in California and I'm still in the
executive search business. But please, no resumes today.
I'm still in the aerospace business, working for Grumman, a contractor here at
JSC. And I hope to continue to be in the space business the rest of my life. The
second part of the question, I'd like to comment on that. If you go over to the
new control center here now and see what I call young kids operating over there
and what they do, I feel real inadequate with what we did back in the old days.
They've got some real sharp people over there. They know what they're doing. And
from a mission control standpoint, today NASA is in good hands.
Well, I'm still at NASA. I head
up a system engineering office where I still do engineering management and try
to be mentors to young engineers coming up. I'm still a youngster at 52, so I
got a lot of time here at the Johnson space Center, I hope, to serve that role,
to bring up the new programs that we are working on, Space Station, Space
Shuttle, and beyond, as well as be mentors to new engineers. I'd like to take a
shot at that second question, too, and Jerry hit part of it. I believe if all
the good work that we did in Apollo I think was important, and I'm very proud of
it. But I think perhaps one of the best things, or accomplishments we had was to
leave a legacy to carry on in much the same way. And when Jerry says the young
people over in the control center today are a lot smarter basically than we are.
And we were. I'm not sure they're any better. But they're a lot smarter! They're
a lot smarter, and they got better tools. But I think the thing that is best
about it is that they have retained and that decision-making capability. As far
as I can tell, management at the higher levels have not penetrated into it with
the micromanagement fingers. And I hope it stays that way. A lot of this had to
do, incidentally, and the reason I want to answer this for Gene did, Gene had a
lot to do with this. Gene was all of our bosses. He started a trend, he and
Chris Kraft working together in those years of the late 50s, early 60s, set a
tone that has carried forward to today in mission operations. Now, I say he was
always the boss. I came back in 82 as the center director, so I had him under me
for a while, but I never did get control of him. They, really, about two or
three very quick thoughts there. They talked about mission control, and the
motto they've got is achievement through excellence, and I believe it's this
excellence, which has allowed the people today to be as good, possibly even
better than they were in the past. So really, they've got a standard of
excellence they've set. The expectations they say are set on themselves,
everybody up here understands the words we use, discipline, morale, tough and
competent. Those are what we must be ourselves, and that is what we expect
others to be. I think that is good, and I think there's a legacy that's been
passed on. and we were very fortunate again to be brought up. Chris Kraft, we
used to call the teacher for a very straightforward reason. I remember the first
day I ever stepped up to the flight director's job, and we always have a
handover in there. And I says, Chris, where's your handover? And there wasn't
one. I says, well, what do you want me to do? And he says, packs his headset
away. He says, you're the flight director. And he walks off console. So I think
there's that kind of a legacy from a standpoint of management that we really
have to be careful, because if we're to be successful in spaceflight, because
spaceflight doesn't take a lot of second guessing, and people got to respond
very quickly. They have to be part of the game plan from the very beginning to
the time they execute this thing. There is such thing as personal responsibility
and accountability, and that still must remain with the people. So if there's a
message for the generation of managers we've got around here, you cannot corrupt
the accountability and responsibility. It has to be in the hands of the people
doing the job. That's it.
Let's give them all a big hand.
[Applause.]
That concludes our program for this afternoon. The open house will be shutting
down at 4 o'clock, so the facilities will be closing. But we are glad to have
had you here today. We hope you have seen the pride that we have and the work
that we do. There will be the balloons lifting off at 6 o'clock, out by Rocket
Park. Thank you.